talking with Seamus.
Dean, congratulations on this wonderful book, sir.
Thank you very much.
I'm sorry, I was unable to get into Cambridge today to do this personally, but this was the only way we could do it.
I've got a couple of other appointments, but I really did want to talk to you.
So this is your first novel, isn't this correct?
And you're a poet and a literary historian by
by trade and inclination, I guess.
Could you explain to me why a novel in this particular case seemed the right way to go?
Well, there's a somewhat wrong-wounded story attached to it.
I didn't really want to write a novel, but I was practically coerced into beginning one by Bill Buford, who was then
who's now a literary editor at the New Yorker, was then editor of Granta in Cambridge, England.
And he was told by some people to pursue me to get me to write down some stories that other people had heard me tell.
And I very reluctantly did it, began it, and then he published the next chapter, Granta.
And then I just avoided Buford's phone calls for months after him.
because I didn't really want to go on with it.
And it took some years for me to actually come to a decision that I really wanted to work out and tell this story.
So I would say that although it took eight or nine years in total from the beginning to the end, it was only in, I think, about 1991 that I seriously undertook the task of bringing it all together, you know.
What was the reason for the reluctance?
Oh, it was varied.
First, I didn't really think that there was a novel there.
Second, I didn't, since I was using so much other biographical material.
I didn't want to dredge that into the daylight.
And third, there were some people whom I realized would have to die before I could publish it.
But then they all obliged in quick order.
I felt fear to go on then.
So it wasn't the literary challenge so much as it was?
Well, that became preeminent then afterwards, but I mean, just to get the sense that this was something that I was freer to preceded the actual literary challenge, which in effect became a challenge of how to organize what was a really considerable mass of stories and
anecdotes, how to organize them into a coherent shape, how to represent the problem of a young consciousness, a young boy's innocence, coming to an awareness of the linkages between things, even though he was getting his information in fragmentary bits and pieces that at first seemed to be disconnected.
So...
That was the literary challenge to, you know, represent that consciousness and at the same time to represent the way in which things which appear to be fragmented nevertheless did in the end lethally tie together.
So I know very little of your biography, which I don't have.
Maybe that's good in a way, but so therefore then there is quite a bit of autobiographical material in here.
Oh, there is.
There is.
But I mean, you know, I've...
gone through this dispute before.
It certainly has a lot of autobiographical material in it, but it is not a memoir, and it's not an autobiography.
There is material there which does not belong to me or my family.
And anyway, the point of telling the story was actually an attempt to represent how one comes to deal with
experience and knowledge.
And in this boy's case, he begins by being fascinated by his mother's and father's relationship and sets out in his investigation rather slowly to find out more about it so that he could love them more and find from them that he damages that relationship between them and
It is.
Do you see it as a detective story in some respects?
Yeah, in a way, in a way.
I like detective fiction, so I suppose I think long reading of a variety of detective stories must have finally had its impact upon me.
But I couldn't actually, you know, with any honesty say it was this or that writer.
It's just a sort of a kind of delight in that sort of intricate form.
Do you think that in the creation of a novel it helps, pardon me, to have a mystery at the center in terms of engaging the reader?
Yeah, I think to have a mystery and at the same time to, well, I suppose to have a mystery, but in this case to have a mystery that is a family secret, which is also a political secret.
And in that way, you know, I recognize that I could write about stories
Northern Ireland in this kind of mystery fashion while at the same time saying something about the, you know, the secrecy that's an inevitable feature of any coerced or, you know, diseased political society.
And I think that the time you're writing about really is, you know, we think of the troubles as really starting in the 60s or whatever, but I think you point out that
You know, this is historic, isn't it?
This is endemic to the... Exactly.
If you could just talk a bit about, you know, the power of memory and stories and, you know, oral tradition and all of these things which seem to have some power and influence over you here in this writing.
Well, I suppose...
I suppose for me, when I was growing up there, it certainly was the case that the older generation, most of them came from Donegal, which is the hinterland of the city of Derry.
And not just the geographical hinterland, but also sort of a hinterland in time.
All those older people told their stories.
talked about their experience very often in these coded forms of ghost stories, fairy stories, and so forth.
And my experience was, in growing up, that since we were the first generation to get the benefits of free education, that my generation actually took a different attitude.
You know, it tended to think of things as problems rather than mysteries.
It tended to be more secular.
than the older generation.
And this boy is sort of in a point of transition where he's beginning the new educational system and he's still inheriting the old folk system.
He's caught between these two ones.
And in a sense he becomes a victim of the transition from one to the other.
Okay.
Of course, the ghosts.
Tell me about this tradition of ghosts, starting on the very first page.
Ghosts are frequent in Irish fiction, but that's not because I think Irish people have some kind of extra-century perception.
It's because Irish history and certainly Irish literature is full of these because it's a way of dealing with, it's a court way of dealing with the specter of a past that is...
you know, that has at its heart some kind of crime, some kind of atrocity, which keeps recurring and recurring in different forms over generations.
So that's, you know, like what is often called the Gothic, the Gothic tradition in Irish novels, especially, you know, in the 19th century from Lester New up to Bram Stover's Dracula or on to Elizabeth Bowen.
They have the same preoccupation with
the difference between, you know, what was normal in European societies telling a story within the conventions of realism and recognizing that realism, whatever its many virtues might be, simply wasn't a sufficient way of dealing with Irish experience, especially with Irish history.
So the, you know, the combination of ghost story, gothic fiction, folklore,
All of those actually are dealing with a history that cannot be interpreted just by, you know, a realist account of the way in which a secular society works.
And I suppose I was, you know, to a fairly marked degree, I'm influenced by that because it's one of the things about much earlier Irish fiction that fascinates me.
And it was also part of my experience as well, you know, because I did have an actual Aunt Katie who told stories like those that I recounted in the novel.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
So a lot of these stories, undoubtedly, then are your own stories, certainly the... Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, these are, for the most part, these are stories that I heard directly from parents, aunts, uncles, grandparents, you know.
And is it necessary to separate the difference between total truthfulness and apocrypha, or is that part of the fun?
No, it's part of the fun.
It's part of the fun.
But, you know, if I were, I think I was able to be more truthful by writing a novel than I would have been by writing a memoir or another.
Fiction manages to be truer than so-called, you know.
Well, that anticipates a question of mine, actually.
I wonder if you could expand on that a little bit.
How so?
Well, in this sense, if I'd been writing a memoir, I'd have named the narrator, and I would have given an account which would almost inevitably be self-serving, you know, of how I, you know, the I of the memoir, would have come to terms with...
a disturbed family history.
But by throwing it into the third-person narrative of a fiction, you know, I don't have to... I can look at not, you know, any endearing view of the young boy, necessarily.
I can just look at the problem, the kind of the problem that faced him and that I think is representative of, you know, the sort of problem that faces all sorts of people as they grow up, you know.
How is it that you can deal...
How can you come to know, especially come to know something that is traumatic and not yourself become traumatized thereby, you know?
And I really couldn't have managed to write truthfully about that if I put my own name on the end of the story as the so-called hero of it, you know?
Of course, and if it were to be a factual treatment or memoir,
then the voice would be entirely different, wouldn't it?
I mean, you'd be writing as a man in his 50s right now, as opposed to the innocent eyes of a child, so to speak.
And that was one of the challenges of it, to keep that voice, that innocent voice, and to keep the innocence and the wonder of a boy who is just receiving bits and pieces of experience, and he cannot see the relations between, but that every single...
element of which nevertheless strikes him with great force.
I mean, of course it's achieved, of course, you know, I'm writing retrospectively in a way, but since I'm not really directly writing about myself, I'm trying to reimagine the innocence of a young boy who is not identical to me, then, yeah, then if you like, the 50-year-old atheistic recall, you know, can disappear and you can get this much, what seems to me, this much more difficult, but...
finer tone in which the boy's innocence and wonder is sustained right through.
And I gather that was the greatest challenge, the greatest challenge was to see this through the eyes of a child.
Yeah, and that to some extent accounts for the way in which the deliberateness with which I broke it up into these little vignettes or cameo shots, you know, whereby
What I'm trying to show is that the boy just gets, you know, as I say, fragments that he is concerned to relate one to the other.
But especially in the early part of the novel, it's especially important that the fragments should come to him with great force, but that their significance, you know, alludes and that suddenly everything is finally only recognizable in retrospect.
So as precocious as he is, he's still a boy.
Still a boy.
And he's also a boy who learns that finding out the truth is something that's not always either advisable or admirable.
Well, what's the famous saying?
Don't ask questions to which you really don't want to know the answers, right?
Or if you could have learned a lesson from the older generation that you can tell the story, you can tell the narrative in the coded form of the ghost or fairy story.
That's a brilliant way of both repressing something and liberating it as well.
But he's too secular.
He's too, you know, quote-unquote educated to recognize that until too late.
And it needed the perspective of time, didn't it?
I mean, for the boys seeing it, but it's still from a distance, isn't it?
Oh, yeah.
It couldn't be in the heat of the moment, could it?
No, no, because, I mean, then it would have...
to do it in the heat of the moment would have created well I mean maybe I've created sufficient confusion but would have created even more confusion and would have I think would have lost the you know the what I think of as one of the problems you know the kind of the pitch which the novel has written it's almost like finding a musical pitch and saying it's in that pitch that the boy's voice and sensibility can be
can be heard.
Anytime I lost that pitch, the rating became really banal or melodramatic or overly sentimental.
and what what i admire most about it i mean we emerge with the sense the reader emerges with the sense of the problems and the troubles uh with a capital t or whatever but i don't think that was you certainly that's not the intention of the novel the novel the novel number one is is to present a human dilemma and to tell a story and i think the fact that it's not it's not a polemic in any way uh
you know, I think maybe you do, fiction does work here to impress upon the reader, you know, the depth of the problems in a far greater way than a factual treatment might have.
Yeah, I think so.
I mean, I suppose the novel is saying anything about, well, obviously in some ways it's saying something about the troubles, but it's really saying that in a society where
there is a deep unresolved conflict and that there's no barrier between the so-called private and the so-called public life.
They interpenetrate one another so that, you know, even the deepest family secret is also a matter of public politics as well.
Is it, in your view, a pessimistic novel or a hopeful novel?
No.
I don't know how to answer that.
Somebody asked me earlier today, was it fatalistic?
And I said, well, fatalistic in the sense that the Empire is caught in a destiny from which in one way he can't escape, but he wins a small victory, you know.
He does actually, despite all the damage that he unwittingly does, you know, he at least,
as the troubles start again towards the end, he at least has got a grasp on how this whole thing genetically grew.
And, uh, but, you know, the question is, is the expense, is the price that he paid, or is the knowledge that he gained?
And, uh, I would say that, you know, maybe the answer then could be, but it's there, and, you know, so it's inescapable, and that's, uh,
You know, as the father says, all this is blood on the bridge, so live with it.
What does a poet bring to the, you know, usually the goal of a novelist is to be the poet.
You know, that seems to be the highest to aspire to.
Here you're going in the other direction.
You're the poet writing a novel.
Yeah, well, I did.
There's some events in that novel that I previously wrote about in poems over 20 years ago.
You know, episodes like the construction of the Rose Garden.
And I wrote those soon after my father's death.
And when I came to write the novel again, you know, I sort of fixed for my own poems a little bit.
Um, I suppose I try to have the best of both worlds, you know, to organize it so that it was, it had, each piece had the kind of definition, the kind of intense definition that I like poems to have, and yet at the same time, the whole thing was driven by a story, a narrative, which, um, which just made it, made all these little individual snapshots, made them
you know, continues like a movie.
Or a mosaic, perhaps?
Yeah, a mosaic that finally reveals its pattern.
And I sort of liked the idea of a pattern finally emerging, you know, because it took away one of the things that sometimes affects poetry, you know, it's love being cryptic and gnomic.
That actually was seeking to reveal
I shouldn't say I'm probably talking about my own poetry.
Useless ambition to be cryptic, you know.
In this case, the novel's ambition was not to be so, you know, to create a cryptic aura, but at the same time to provide an accessible explanation.
And there is a healthy respect for imagery, however, it does seem to me, which is a... Yeah, but you see, I think that's also part of the...
consequence of trying to imagine how the world looked to a young boy.
You know, it's the eye of wonder has to be sustained when he looks at something, you know, when he feels something.
And that allows for a certain kind of clarity of perception and a constant imaging of what's happening that, you know, normally
as something that gets blurred or worn away when you get older.
Do you have an opinion?
I'm in my 50s as well, by the way, and I'm working on a book now on
on the power of all that it'll have as a chapter, you know, this whole cultural war that's going on and the debates over the canon and the future of books as we know them.
Do you have an opinion to share on the relevance of story and of the novel today, 1997, as we approach the year 2000?
Anything you could...
Yeah, relation to everything, I guess.
You are a literary historian.
Well, I suppose I could say one or two things on that.
One is that the kind of stories that are much favored now and that I think actually spring from what you might call multiculturalism,
the privileging of subsidiary or stifled cultures in particular.
One thing that is always favored by such narratives is the recreation and detail of that culture's environment.
But then on the other hand, what sometimes tends to contradict or at least cause problems for multicultural political correctness is that if a story is going to stay loyal to its specific
locale and experience, it nevertheless won't really be recognizable to a larger audience unless it finds also some way of being disloyal to that.
That is some way of transcending it, some way of getting beyond it.
And there is a connection between knowing something very intimately with such an intimacy that somebody else who does not know that thing nevertheless can recognize it.
It's sort of the self-enclosed intimacy, the thing that, you know, says only if you are, you know, black or Hispanic or Irish or something, it's only if you are that that you could recognize this.
I think that's a kind of damaging provincialism that actually undermines some of the best aspirations of multicultural politics.
That's a wonderful observation.
I appreciate it.
Now, are you thinking of another novel?
Thinking of it, yeah.
Well, I wrote, I'll be a little more honest on that.
I've written about 5,000 words of a new novel, but I wrote those, I don't know, five or six months ago, and little has happened since.
But it's not going to be, as far as I can recognize it from this piece,
If this piece survives at all, it's not going to be anything like this.
I mean, as it stands now, it has an opening episode that takes place in Wyoming.
Wyoming?
Yeah, and it's going to be far from.
Ireland will probably creep into it.
I wonder how.
Have you been to Wyoming?
Oh, yeah, I lived on a ranch in Wyoming for about three months once.
Oh, really?
On my own.
Wonderful.
So where is home for you now?
Dublin, most of the time.
But I teach one semester a year at the University of Notre Dame where I'm building an Irish Studies program there.
Really?
But I just do that from September to December each year.
The rest of the time I sit in Dublin looking out the window.
Well listen, the novel is... just tell me, when did the title assert itself?
That was quite early because I remember muttering to myself about being totally in the dark to, you know, proceed with this.
And I was doing that about the time I was writing the little piece about reading in bed with my brothers beside me, you know.
And I did remember, you know, when Liam would force me to put off the light, and I'd lie there in frustration, not knowing what had happened.
So I'd just lie there and imagine how the story might evolve.
So I thought, well, that's in effect what I'm doing.
I'm in the dark.
I'm writing in the dark, but it's also a kind of reading of the darkness.
So the title was there, you know, before most of it was there.
Really?
Has reading always been such a powerful force and influence in your life?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Especially when I was a kid, two things that dominated my life were football and reading.
Mind you, in that order.
I'm sorry, say that again, please.
The two things that dominated my young life were football and reading.
In that order.
In that order, yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, I think I've got plenty here, and I really appreciate you taking the time to talk to me.
Not at all.
My pleasure.
And I hope we meet sometime.
I hope so.
Thank you very much, sir.
Thank you.
Goodbye.